Surveyor Guidance:
Page 444 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
How does the discharge planning process verify appointment source(s), dates and addresses?
How was the patient involved in the discharge and aftercare planning process?
Were discharge related documents made available to the patient, family, community treatment
source and/or any other appropriate sources?
Is there indication that the discharge planning process included the participation of
multidisciplinary staff and the patient? Have the results been communicated to the post-
discharge treatment entity?
Is there evidence that contact with the post-discharge treatment entity included communication
of treatment recommendations (including information regarding the patient’s medications)?
Is a contact person named, and does the patient have a specific appointment date and time for
the initial follow-up visit?
PERSONNEL RESOURCES (PH-PR)
The psychiatric hospital providing psychiatric services shall have adequate numbers
of qualified professional and support staff to evaluate patients, formulate written,
individualized comprehensive treatment plans, provide active treatment measures,
and engage in discharge planning.
The psychiatric hospital shall be adequately staffed with qualified mental health
professionals and support staff to carry out an intensive and comprehensive active
treatment program and to protect and promote the physical and mental health of the
patients. Adequate numbers are defined to mean the numbers, and deployment, of
staff with qualifications to evaluate, plan, implement, and document active treatment.
The psychiatric hospital is responsible for organizing available staff and administrative
duties along with patient appointments, treatment plan meetings, treatment sessions,
activities, materials, equipment and patient assignments to wards, units and groups in
such a way that results in patients achieving the maximum therapeutic benefit.
SR.1 The psychiatric hospital shall employ or undertake to provide adequate numbers of
qualified professional, technical, and consultative personnel to:
SR.1a Evaluate Patients;
SR.1b Formulate written individualized, comprehensive treatment plans;
SR.1c Provide active treatment measures; and,
SR.1d Engage in discharge planning.
Interpretive Guidelines:
The patient, together with all relevant professionals caring for the patient, shall be expected to
participate in the discharge planning process. Staffing shall be sufficient to facilitate this
outcome, to the maximum extent possible.
Page 445 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
Staffing shall be sufficient so that members of the patient’s treatment team and others
responsible for evaluation and assessment can contribute their respective data for consideration
in the formulation of the treatment plan.
Surveyor Guidance:
Is there adequate staff to assure that the admission work-ups (assessment, diagnostic data
gathering) are completed in a timely manner?
Is there evidence that there is continuing evaluation of the patient’s progress and response to
treatment?
Are evaluations delayed or absent?
Was there sufficient discipline participation at the treatment team meeting to assure formulation
of a treatment plan that meets the patient’s individualized needs?
What problems prevent staff members from attending treatment meetings? Do they relate to
staffing?
Are the assessments/evaluations absent or delayed to the extent that they are not useful to the
treatment team for the purpose of planning individualized treatment?
Active treatment occurs when the patient receives treatment interventions that are delivered
under the direction of a physician, and which are specific to patient strengths, disabilities, and
problems identified in the treatment plan. Treatment interventions and other services are
furnished in accordance with accepted standards of professional practice. Although the active
treatment process shall be identifiable in documentation, it shall be first and foremost
observable and evident in daily practice.
Treatment interventions need to be individualized, in that the patient receives assistance with
resolving or ameliorating the problems/circumstances that led to admission. Expect to see
treatment focused on the unique needs of individual patients. For example, several patients may
be referred to “Anger Management Group,” but the focus of discussion and therapeutic
intervention may differ depending on the individual patient’s particular issue regarding managing
anger.
Whether structure shall be imposed by staff or whether the patient can direct his or her own
activities for periods of time (without staff supervision), is based on the patient’s ability to
engage in constructive, appropriate behavior (without engaging in harm to self or others). Be
certain that the patient’s time on the unit is maximized toward the further development of
appropriate desired outcomes, including but not limited to leisure and recreation.
Through observation, interviews and record reviews, can you determine that patients receive
active treatment?
Is the distribution of staff consistent with patient needs? Is appropriate staffing sufficient to carry
out treatment plans?
Does the patient attend therapies that are relevant to the identified problems that led to the
patient’s admission?
Page 446 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
Are staff absences and/or vacancies preventing the patient from receiving active treatment? Are
patients not attending therapeutic activities off the unit because there is no staff to escort them?
Are therapeutic groups not available on the unit for patients who are not able to go off the unit?
Are patients observed not engaged in activities while staff attend to administrative tasks?
Are active treatment sessions or activities carried out at discrete time intervals exclusively? Or is
active treatment implemented as the patient’s needs emerge during the day, as well?
Does a review of quality assurance data reveal a pattern of serious incidents occurring on
particular shifts and/or days of the week?
What do patients report to the surveyor are their treatment modalities?
Do patient interviews indicate that patients believe the treatment being provided is helpful?
Does the scheduling of activities and their content relate directly to the patient’s treatment
objectives or are the activities/content generalized, non-therapeutic “time-fillers”?
Can staff describe how their activities relate to the patient’s treatment objectives?
At any point in time, in any of the patient’s experiences in the psychiatric hospital is the thrust of
the patient’s treatment plan observable during the staff and/or patient interactions?
Is there a consistent, observable pattern of evidence that staff provide, reinforce and otherwise
implement measures to achieve active treatment objectives?
MEDICAL STAFF (PH-MS)
SR.1 Inpatient psychiatric services shall be under the supervision of a clinical director,
service chief, or equivalent who is qualified to provide the leadership required for an
intensive treatment program.
SR.1a The clinical director, service chief or equivalent shall meet the training and
experience requirements for examination by the American Board of Psychiatry
and Neurology, or the American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and
Psychiatry.
SR.1b If no certification, evidence that the clinical director, service chief or equivalent
took the Boards would satisfy the requirement of PH-MS (SR.1a) that the clinical
director, service chief or equivalent met the training and experience
requirements for examination by American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology
or the American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and Psychiatry.
SR.2 The clinical director is ultimately responsible for the medical and psychiatric care that is
provided to patients.
SR.2a The clinical director shall monitor and evaluate the quality and appropriateness
of services and treatment provided by the medical staff.
SR.2b Services and treatment prescribed to patients shall be in accordance with
Page 447 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
appropriate and acceptable standards of practice.
SR.2c In states that allow psychologists to have admitting privileges, it is still the
responsibility of the clinical director to oversee the quality of the patient’s
treatment.
SR.2d Doctor of Medicine or Osteopathy and other appropriate professional personnel
shall be available to provide necessary medical and surgical diagnostic and
treatment services. If medical and surgical diagnostic services and treatment
are not available within the psychiatric hospital, the psychiatric hospital shall
have an agreement with an outside source of these services to ensure that they
are immediately available, or a satisfactory agreement shall be established for
transferring patients to a general hospital that participates in the Medicare
program.
SR.3 The clinical director shall ascertain that quality improvement programs are in place to
monitor all areas of patient care and shall implement educational programs for all levels
of staff.
SR.4 The number and qualifications of Doctor of Medicine and Osteopathy shall be adequate
to provide essential psychiatric services.
SR.5 If outpatient behavioral health services are provided, all medically supervised programs
will have a medical director who is a Doctor of Medicine or Osteopathy.
SR.5a For outpatient services such as outpatient detoxification and IOP, there is a
psychiatrist available 24hours a day/7days a week.
Interpretive Guidelines:
Inpatient psychiatric services include the following functions of which the clinical director is
responsible for maintaining: admission interviews, assessments and evaluations; psychiatric
and medical work-ups; treatment team leadership; medication management; on-call provision of
emergency psychiatric and medical treatment; provision of individual, group and family
therapies; provision of clinical supervision to other professionals and paraprofessionals;
provision of medical and psychiatric educational workshops and conferences for all staff; and
provision of consultation to staff for clinical and/or administrative matters.
The number and qualifications of Doctor of Medicine and Osteopathy shall be adequate to
provide essential psychiatric services.
The number of full-time, part-time and consulting staff, who are board certified within each
category and their availability to the psychiatric hospital shall be adequate to provide psychiatric
services, as described above. Adequacy is considered in light of the following:
• Number of admissions, discharges and current patients by treatment units;
• Size of the psychiatric hospital;
• Geographic proximity of the wards and units;
Page 448 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
• Organization and kinds of treatment services rendered to the patients;
• Availability of the physician coverage on evening, nights and weekends;
• Availability of physicians to participate in treatment planning;
• Availability of psychiatrists to consult with non-psychiatric physicians about
psychotropic medication regimens; and,
• Availability of physicians to consult with multi-disciplinary staff about treatment issues.
When outpatient behavioral health services are provided, all medically supervised programs will
have a medical director who is a physician, to ensure that proper care is provided. These
services may include but not be limited to medically supervised detoxification, and intensive
outpatient or residential or any other program model that serves patients with medical needs.
Surveyor Guidance:
How many staff are board certified? Fully trained? How many full-time/part-time specialties are
represented? How are medical staff deployed? To what programs/units are they assigned?
Why?
How much time do physicians spend on the units? Based on observations, interviews, and
medical record reviews is coverage adequate to meet the needs of sampled patients? To meet
the needs of other patients observed during the survey?
If outpatient services are medically supervised, is there a physician available 24/7?
Contracts or other arrangements with individuals and/or providers assure that medical and
surgical services are available to meet the needs of the patients. Review the medical and
surgical services provided by the psychiatric hospital during the interview with the clinical
director. Discuss contract or arrangements with the clinical director for services provided off
grounds.
NURSING SERVICES (PH-NS)
The psychiatric hospital shall have a qualified director of psychiatric nursing services.
In addition to the director of nursing, there shall be adequate numbers of registered
nurses, licensed practical nurses, and mental health workers to provide necessary
nursing care.
SR.1 The director of psychiatric nursing services shall be a registered nurse who has a
master’s degree in psychiatric or mental health nursing or its equivalent from a school
of nursing accredited by the National League for Nursing or be qualified by education
and experience in the care of the mentally ill.
SR.1a If the director of psychiatric nursing services has less than a master’s degree in
Psychiatric Nursing, there shall be evidence of experience and on-going training
in psychiatric nursing. (e.g., Documented consultation from a nurse with a
master’s degree in Psychiatric Nursing constitutes on-going training).
Page 449 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
SR.1b The director of psychiatric nursing services shall demonstrate competence to
participate in the interdisciplinary formulation of individual treatment plans; to
give skilled nursing care and therapy; and to direct, monitor, and evaluate the
nursing care furnished.
SR.2 There shall be adequate numbers of registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and
mental health workers to provide the nursing care necessary under each patient's
active treatment program and to maintain progress notes on each patient.
SR.2a The inpatient staffing pattern shall insure the availability of a registered
professional nurse 24 hours each day.
Interpretive Guidelines:
Psychiatric nursing functions include the following: supervision of paraprofessional staff;
assessment, planning, provision, and evaluation of psychiatric nursing care to patients;
medication teaching; management of the therapeutic milieu; provision of mandatory and
voluntary in-service training to all staff; and provision of specialized treatments and therapies,
such as individual, group and family therapies, that require the clinical expertise of a
professional psychiatric nurse.
Determine that there is a qualified Director of Nursing (DON) providing the required leadership
and supervision for the psychiatric nursing department.
The evaluation of sufficient numbers and level of RNs, LPNs and mental health workers is
based on the patient characteristics as seen in structured observations of patients in the sample
and other patients in the psychiatric hospital, patient interviews, and as evidenced in medical
records and other data related to patients (e.g., incident reports, seclusion/restraint reports).
Patient care assignments shall be appropriate to the skills and qualifications of the nursing
personnel providing patient care.
There shall be evidence that all nursing personnel have education, experience and/or training in
psychiatric care. Mental health workers spend the majority of their workday interacting with
patients. Expect to see evidence that they are receiving on-going supervision and training.
Mental health workers shall be assigned patient care duties and therapeutic modalities that
reflect their educational level, psychiatric training, and experience.
Surveyor Guidance:
During the interview with the DON, assess his/her educational background and psychiatric
nursing and leadership skills.
Are nursing assessments completed on all patients?
Do the multidisciplinary treatment plans reflect nursing input which include specific nursing
interventions for nursing problems (e.g., violence toward self/others, physical/medical crises)?
Is nursing care evaluated by an R.N., with changes in the care based on the patient’s progress
or lack thereof?
Page 450 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
Are intrusive techniques (e.g., seclusion, restraint, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), and/or
medical procedures) and patient incidents (e.g. medication errors, patient falls, patient-to-patient
and patient-to-staff injuries) monitored in accordance with psychiatric hospital policy, State
statutes and safe nursing practice?
Are nursing personnel observed relating to patients in a therapeutic manner?
Based on structured observations of the patients in the sample and other patients in the
psychiatric hospital, patient and staff interviews and medical record review, ascertain that
nursing services are provided in accordance with safe, acceptable standards of nursing
practice.
Information obtained from the DON would include: implementation of continuous quality
improvement programs; provision of orientation, in-service and continuing education programs
for nursing personnel especially in the areas of psychiatric nursing, nursing process, prevention
and management of violence, CPR and Universal Precautions.
The staffing, including levels of nursing personnel, shall be reviewed for the day(s) of the survey
and evaluated based on the level of needs presented by the patients. Additional staffing
patterns shall be reviewed if a problem or concern is evidenced. Decisions regarding extent of
additional data (number of wards and dates) to be reviewed shall be based on the degree of
problem/concern. Patient need assessment/patient acuity shall be reviewed for any wards as
deemed necessary based on problems/concerns found in the sampling review.
Expect to see evidence of orientation programs as well as ongoing continuing education
programs for Licensed Practical Nurses and mental health workers that stress individualized
treatment interventions.
If your observations and/or interviews indicate a staffing problem, you may want to consider the
following variables in assessing adequacy of nursing personnel coverage:
• Organization and types of services provided to patients by the nursing department;
• Number and levels of nursing care needs of patients, including average length of stay,
acuity of patients and nursing care requirements;
• Number and levels of nursing personnel based on the roles and functions required of
nursing;
• Number of suicidal/assaultive patients;
• Seclusion/restraint incidents;
• Number of admissions and discharges;
• Number and type of accidents and/or injuries;
• Amount and complexity of medication regimens;
• Medication errors;
Page 451 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
• Use of P.R.N. (as needed) medications;
• Medical (physical) procedures;
• Assignment and utilization of “pool” nursing personnel (those staff who are hired
through a contract service and are not employees of the psychiatric hospital).
Contractual staff shall receive orientation and training necessary for assigned
functions, and shall be supervised by employees of the psychiatric hospital;
• Availability of RNs to supervise/consult with nursing/non-nursing personnel about
patient care;
• Availability of RNs to assess and implement care in crisis situations;
• Availability of RNs to interact with patients in structured activities; and,
• Involvement of patients with personnel.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES (PH-PS)
SR.1 The psychiatric hospital shall provide or have available psychological services to meet
the needs of the patients.
Interpretive Guidelines:
Psychology services may include the following: diagnostic testing and diagnostic formulations
on request from physicians; provision of individual, group and family therapies; participation in
multi-disciplinary treatment conferences; and program development and evaluation.
The number of full-time, part-time, or consulting psychologists shall be adequate to provide
necessary services to patients. Arrangements with outside resources shall assure that
necessary patient services will be provided.
Surveyor Guidance:
Determine if the individual patients have a need for psychological services or testing and if they
were provided. Determine if any of the patients reviewed had a need for psychological services,
but none were requested.
Policies, program narratives and interviews shall indicate and describe the various types of
psychological services that are offered for the populations and various settings that the
psychiatric hospital serves. (e.g., assessments, individual therapy, family therapy, testing)
If tests are performed, determine if the results are reported in sufficient time to be integrated in
the patient’s active treatment and treatment plan.
How does the psychiatric hospital or Psychological Service Department determine whether or
not: it meets the needs of patients? Its services are underutilized or over-utilized?
Page 452 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
SOCIAL WORK SERVICES (PH-SS)
Social work services are specifically intended to prevent, treat and increase social and
emotional functioning during and following an episode of acute illness or exacerbation
of chronic mental illness. Social work services shall provide patients with a
comprehensive assessment as well as a variety of therapeutic modalities that are an
integral part of each patient’s individualized treatment plan.
Social workers focus on psychosocial factors including family relationships; living
arrangements; patient’s developmental history, as appropriate; and economic,
cultural, religious, educational, and vocational background as they impinge on the
understanding, treatment, and relapse prevention of the psychiatric disorder. As
members of the interdisciplinary team, social workers contribute to program
development and treatment planning, review all patients and collaborate in the
development and maintenance of the therapeutic milieu.
SR.1 Social work services are provided to patients and their families to ensure that a
patient’s illness, recovery, and safe transition from one care setting to another are
considered within the context of his or her bio-psychosocial needs.
SR.1a Social work services shall be furnished in accordance with accepted standards
of practice and established policies and procedures.
SR.1b The social work policies for service provision to the patient describe the
organizational structure of the department (program) and the range of services
performed by the department.
SR.2 There shall be a director of social work services who monitors and evaluates the quality
and appropriateness of social work services furnished.
SR.2a The director of the social work department or service shall have a master’s
degree from an accredited school of social work or shall be qualified by
education and experience in the social work services needs of the mentally ill.
SR.2a(1) If the director does not hold a master’s degree in social work, at least
one staff member shall have this qualification.
SR.3 The duties, functions, and responsibilities of the director of social work shall be clearly
delineated and documented in the psychiatric hospital’s policies and procedures.
SR.3a When staff other than a social worker perform delineated social service duties,
the Director of Social Work or a master’s level social worker (MSW) qualified
supervisory staff member shall be involved to oversee the quality and
appropriateness of service provided.
SR.4 The social work staff shall complete a comprehensive psychosocial assessment on
each patient that is admitted (See PH-PA).
SR.5 Social work staff responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to, participating in
discharge, planning, arranging for follow-up care, and developing mechanisms for
exchange of appropriate information with sources outside the psychiatric hospital.
Page 453 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
SR.5a For outpatient programs, social work services responsibilities shall include
coordination of case management services.
Interpretive Guidelines:
Social work Services are provided based on a body of established social work knowledge,
technical expertise, and humanistic values that allow for the provision of a specialized, unique,
and individualized plan of care for each patient. The social services staff shall have the capacity
to provide assistance in a sensitive and supportive manner to patients based on knowledge of
human behavior, observational, and communication skills. With this foundation, the social
worker establishes therapeutic relationships, assesses complex psychosocial problems, selects
problem solving interventions and helps patients function effectively.
Social work functions may include the following functions: Intake or admission screening,
psychosocial assessment of a newly admitted patient; developing an update or detailed re-
assessment of the patient; high-social risk case finding; contact with family and others
significant in the patient’s life. Such functions may include patient and family education, support,
and advocacy; providing coordination/liaison with community-based social and mental health
agencies regarding the pre-admission status of the patient; participating as a member of the
treatment team in development of treatment planning and subsequent planned interventions
(modalities). Such modalities may include supportive, individual, couple, family, or group
therapy, aimed at meeting specified goals identified in the treatment plan.
Treatment and discharge planning activities, liaison/follow-up efforts shall be based upon the
goals, including discharge goals, and staff responsibilities specified in the treatment plan.
Social work contact with the patient, family, and significant others shall occur during, or as soon
as possible, after the admission. High-risk case finding shall result in significant data being
available for early integration into the treatment plan and subsequent social work action as
indicated. The treatment team shall consider, for possible inclusion into the patient’s treatment
plan, the anticipated social work role and expected interventions as recommended in the
psychosocial assessment.
Continuity of care is an important social work principle and may be demonstrated through case
management and a major role in discharge planning. Activities, in conjunction with the patient
wishes, may include contact with patient’s family, identifying and assisting in referral of the
patient to community-based agencies at the time of discharge. Finally, post-discharge follow-up
may be done to assure that linkage of the patient with community resources has occurred to
reduce re-admission.
Surveyor Guidance:
The duties, functions, and responsibilities of the director of social services/social work shall be
clearly delineated and documented in the psychiatric hospital’s policies and procedures. If the
director is not MSW qualified and at least one staff member is MSW qualified, verify the duties,
functions, and responsibilities of the MSW.
How does the director periodically audit the quality of social work services furnished?
What are the outcomes of audits conducted? What percentage of psychosocial assessments
was completed and available in written form at the time of the interdisciplinary treatment plan?
Page 454 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
How does the patient’s social needs as addressed by the social worker in the psychosocial
assessment compare against the goals developed in the interdisciplinary treatment plan?
Has social work staff provided active treatment in accordance with the patient’s treatment plan?
Accepted standards of practice are based on policy statements adopted by the National
Association of Social Workers and a definition of social work practice in health care adapted by
the Consortium of Health Care Social Work Organizations.
Determine who completed the assessment required by 42 CFR Section 482.61(a)(4) (See PH-
SS (SR.4)) and initiated preliminary discharge planning.
Patient and staff interviews, structured observations and review of selected medical records
yield the information necessary to determine how well social work has met the needs of the
patients. The surveyor shall evaluate these data to determine adequacy of qualified and support
staff deployed to patient areas and their duties.
Accepted standards of practice are based on policy statements adopted by the National
Association of Social Workers and a definition of social work practice in health care adapted by
the Consortium of Health Care Social Work Organizations. Staff shall adhere to the psychiatric
hospital’s personnel requirements.
What are the director’s qualifications, experience and scope of duties within this position?
If a MSW staff member, other than the director, is performing any of these duties, what are this
staff member’s experience and scope of duties performed? Why were these duties delegated?
Are social work staff routinely involved in providing services to the patient that are identified in
the treatment plan?
To what extent do social work staff provide discharge planning services to the patient in the way
of: supportive individual, couple, family, or group therapy focused on discharge goals of the
patient? Carrying out a liaison role with community resource providers?
Have social work staff assured that adequate information is provided to post-discharge patient
service providers?
PSYCHOSOCIAL ASSESSMENT (PH-PA)
The purpose of the psychosocial assessment is to determine the current baseline
social functioning (strengths and deficits) of the patient, from which treatment
interventions and discharge plans are to be formulated.
Patient length of stay is a key factor influencing psychiatric hospital documentation
policy (e.g., establishing timeframes for completion, documentation, and filing of the
psychosocial assessment, and treatment planning in the medical record).
A psychosocial assessment shall be completed on all patients within a timeframe
appropriate to the patient population served. The organization shall define appropriate
timeframes for completion of the psychosocial assessment. Key components to be
addressed include:
Page 455 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
SR.1 Factual and Historical Information:
SR.1a Specific reasons for the patient’s admission or readmission;
SR.1b A description of the patient’s past and present bio-psychosocial functioning;
SR.1c Family and marital history, dynamics, and patient’s relationships with family and
significant others;
SR.1d Pertinent religious and cultural factors;
SR.1e History of physical, sexual and emotional abuse;
SR.1f Significant aspects of psychiatric, medical, and substance abuse history and
treatment as presented by family members and significant others;
SR.1g Educational, vocational, employment, and military service history;
SR.1h Identification of community resources including previously used treatment
sources; and,
SR.1i Identification of present environmental and financial needs.
SR.2 Social Evaluation to include:
SR.2a Patient strengths and deficits;
SR.2b The psychosocial assessment identifies immediate high-risk issues
(suicide/homicide/other) that may require immediate intervention or could
present as barriers to the patient returning to an optimal level of functioning or
being transitioned into a lower level of care, as appropriate.
SR.3 The findings of the psychosocial assessment are integrated into the patient’s
individualized interdisciplinary treatment plan, as appropriate. Conclusions and
recommendations from the historical and social evaluation sections shall result in the
development of recommendations related to the following areas:
SR.3a Anticipated necessary steps for discharge to occur;
SR.3b High-risk patient and/or family psychosocial issues requiring early treatment
planning and immediate intervention regardless of the patient’s length of stay;
SR.3c Specific community resources/ support systems for utilization in discharge
planning (e.g., housing, living arrangements, financial aid, and aftercare
treatment sources); and,
SR.3d Anticipated social work role(s) in treatment, case management and/or discharge
planning.
Interpretive Guidelines:
The expected length of time to complete a psychosocial assessment (inclusive of cultural,
Page 456 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
religious, and family issues) varies with the psychiatric population served. For example, in
psychiatric hospitals with a shorter length of stay (measured in days or weeks), the expectation
is that the psychosocial assessment be completed within a timeframe that allows for collection
of the information necessary to determine appropriate psychiatric care and treatment planning
for the patient (e.g., within 72 hours of a 7-day hospitalization). Similarly, in organizations that
provide long-term or mandated care (e.g., civil or involuntary commitments measured in months
or years), the expectation is that that the psychosocial assessment be completed within a
timeframe that allows for the collection of information necessary to meet the requirements of the
commitment and determine appropriate psychiatric care and treatment planning for the patient
(e.g., within 10 days).
Surveyor Guidance:
• Review organization policy/procedure to determine organization requirements
regarding timeframes for completion of the psychosocial assessment
• Determine if any state regulations regarding timeframes for the completion of the
psychosocial assessment exist
o Interview staff
o Review regulations as appropriate
Determine if the psychosocial assessment indicates clear identification of the informants(s) and
sources of information and whether information is considered reliable. There shall be some
indication of patient participation to the extent possible in provision of data relative to treatment
and discharge planning. Integration of significant data including identified high-risk psychosocial
issues (problems) into the treatment plan shall be in evidence.
THERAPEUTIC ACTIVITIES (PH-TA)
SR.1 The psychiatric hospital shall provide a therapeutic activities program.
SR.1a There shall be daily therapeutic activities.
SR.2 The therapeutic activities program shall be appropriate to the needs and interests of
patients and be directed toward restoring and maintaining optimal levels of physical and
psychosocial functioning.
SR.2a Therapeutic activities provided shall be appropriate to the needs of diverse
populations and consider: age, level of functioning, and reflective of program as
well as individual patient’s goals and objectives.
SR.3 The number of qualified therapists, support personnel, and consultants shall be
adequate to provide comprehensive therapeutic activities consistent with each patient's
active treatment program.
SR.4 Assessments shall be performed and documented within the designated time frames of
the program policies by the appropriate discipline therapist.
SR.5 There shall be an established monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to conduct
Page 457 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
consistent, timely review of the quality and appropriateness of therapeutic and
rehabilitative services.
Interpretive Guidelines:
A variety of therapeutic and rehabilitative activities are selectively used as therapeutic tools in
providing active treatment to the psychiatric patient. Therapeutic activities focus upon the
development and maintenance of adaptive skills that will improve the patient’s functioning.
In contrast, leisure activities provide the patient with individualized opportunities to acquire
knowledge, skills and attitudes about meaningful leisure involvement and experiences. A patient
may need treatment and/or remediation of functional behavior(s) prior to leisure involvement.
However, for some psychiatric patients, the priority need may be for leisure education and
activities.
The organization is responsible for ensuring the consistent availability and provision of
individualized therapeutic activities and rehabilitative services based on patient needs.
The selection of individualized therapeutic and rehabilitative staff modalities shall be based on
patient need and goals set in the patient’s treatment plan. Rehabilitative services may include
educational, occupational, recreational, physical, art, dance, music, and speech therapies and
vocational rehabilitation evaluation and counseling.
There are many disciplines that serve patients in the therapeutic activities department. Staff
may include but are not limited to the following: educational instructors, registered occupational
therapist/certified occupational therapy assistant, certified therapeutic recreation specialist,
certified therapeutic recreation assistant, speech-language pathologist has certificate of clinical
competence, registered and certified music therapist, registered art therapist, and registered
physical therapist. The qualified vocational specialist may perform duties of a rehabilitation
counselor, vocational evaluator, or a work adjustment specialist.
Qualified staff shall complete their respective discipline assessments for use in multidisciplinary
treatment planning. Specific role(s) and modalities to be implemented by rehabilitative staff shall
be determined by goals set in the patient’s treatment plan.
Qualified therapists who provide clinical services and administrative staff shall utilize established
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to conduct consistent timely review of the quality and
appropriateness of therapeutic and rehabilitative services delivered to patients.
Surveyor Guidance:
Determine if there is evidence in the medical records that therapeutic activities are included in
the individual treatment plans. Staff shall be familiar with the goals and staff interventions
described in the patient’s treatment plan and determining the patient’s response. If a patient had
a need for therapeutic activities, were their needs considered, addressed and met?
Look on the posted unit schedule and determine if activities are offered as listed. Determine if
the interventions and activities are of sufficient frequency and intensity to achieve maximum
therapeutic benefit. Determine if patient needs are met consistently at all times including
evenings and weekends. Determine if current activity schedules are clearly posted for patient
and staff reference and observe selected activities. Are the scheduled activities related to the
Page 458 of 459
NIAHO® Accreditation Requirements, Interpretive Guidelines and Surveyor Guidance for Hospitals
Revision 25-1 (updated) – Effective September 8, 2025
particular patient area and specific treatment needs of patients?
Determine the qualifications, experience, duties and responsibilities of the Therapeutic Activities
Director, discipline supervisors and other therapists. Qualifications shall match the therapeutic
needs of the various populations served. Considerations as to population age, diagnosis, level
of functioning and theme of the various programs (example: short term crisis stabilization,
rehabilitation, residential).