Step 3: Restructure the Database
The current DNV module needs two layers:

Layer A — A pathway selector at the top:

DNV NIAHO (Default for US hospitals)
DNV DIAS (International / Optional)
Layer B — Separate standards content for each: The compliance_items database table needs a new field called "accreditation_body" that distinguishes between NIAHO and DIAS items. Every NIAHO chapter and standard gets tagged accreditation_body = "NIAHO". DIAS items stay tagged "DIAS".

This way both exist in the system but only the relevant one shows based on the user's selection.

Step 4: Build Out the NIAHO Chapter Structure
Based on what NIAHO covers (which Akshay needs to verify against the actual manual), the chapters typically include:

Quality Management System
Governing Body
Chief Executive Officer
Medical Staff
Nursing Services
Staffing Management
Medical Records Service
Pharmaceutical Services
Dietary Services
Quality Management and Performance Improvement
Infection Prevention and Control
Patient Rights
Surgical Services
Anesthesia Services
Nuclear Medicine Services
Outpatient Services
Laboratory Services
Radiologic Services
Rehabilitation Services
Respiratory Care Services
Emergency Services
Discharge Planning
Organ, Tissue, and Eye Procurement
Physical Environment
This list is approximate. The actual NIAHO 25-1 manual is the only authoritative source. Akshay must confirm chapter list against the real manual before building.

Step 5: Content Migration Process Per Chapter
For each NIAHO chapter, Akshay follows this workflow in Replit:

Read the NIAHO chapter in the manual
Identify the standard codes (NIAHO uses different codes than DIAS)
Build the chapter card structure mirroring the existing module pattern (Chapter Overview, Flashcards, Practice Quiz, Deep Dive Tracer, Common Survey Risk Points)
Generate quiz questions from the standard text using a Claude prompt
Human review by either Akshay or a clinical advisor before going live
Suggested Claude prompt for content generation per chapter:

"Read this NIAHO Revision 25-1 chapter on [Chapter Name]. Generate 20 multiple-choice quiz questions that test understanding of the standards. Include 8 study concepts. List the 5 most common survey risk points that DNV surveyors cite during NIAHO surveys. Format as JSON for direct upload."

Step 6: Update the Dropdown Label
The current dropdown says "DNV-Accredited Hospitals." This should be changed to be specific about which standard the user is selecting. Options:

"DNV NIAHO Hospitals (US / CMS-deemed)"
"DNV DIAS Hospitals (International)"
Clarity here matters because a hospital administrator clicking the wrong one wastes their time.

Step 7: Verify Agent Wiring
Once NIAHO content is built, every agent that previously referenced DIAS or generically said "DNV" needs to dynamically pull the correct standards body. Apply the same dynamic variable approach we discussed earlier:


activeStandardsBody = 
  Hospital JCAHO mode → "Joint Commission"
  ASC AAAHC mode → "AAAHC"
  DNV NIAHO mode → "DNV NIAHO"
  DNV DIAS mode → "DNV DIAS"